Welcome to Future Histories. My name is Jan Gross and it is my great pleasure to welcome Lea Ippie in today's show.
She is professor of political theory at the London School of Economics
and author of the brilliant book Free Coming of Age at the End of History.
Before we start, I would like to thank Wilfried and Fabian for their kind donations
and I would like to welcome Björn, Manuel and Gerion as patrons of Future Histories.
Thank you so much and now please enjoy today's episode with Lea Ippie.
Welcome Lea. Thank you for having me. It's a pleasure. Just to give the audience some
orientation, could you give us a rough sketch of the quite unique position of socialist Albania
and the conflict between East and West in the time when you were growing up?
Yeah, so I grew up. I was born in 1979 and was growing up in Albania in the 80s
and lived through the transition from being communist system to a liberal system in 1990.
In the time in which I was growing up, Albania was a country with a socialist constitution
which had fallen out with every other socialist country or at least every other socialist
superpower in the world. It was also a very isolated country economically and militarily,
politically on all fronts and the perception and the rhetoric of its own self-understanding
that came through the history books and the classes and school when I was growing up was of
it being this unique country that was engaged, a very small country which was engaged in a dual
fight against both Western imperialism, so Anglo-Americans on the one hand, but also
Soviet and Chinese imperialism on the other. And it hadn't been like that throughout its history,
so Albania became socialist in 1946 at the end of the Second World War and it had a brief period
of alliance with Yugoslavia with which it fell out mainly for issues to do with territorial
integrity and what would happen to Albania and the reluctance of part of the Albanian socialist
leadership to be part of Yugoslavia as a socialist republic as some other projects went and for that
reason kind of allied with the Soviet Union but broke with the Soviet Union when the Soviet Union
destalinized and criticized the cult of Stalin and Albania had this perception of itself as being the
only rigorous, coherent, pure communist country in the world which somehow also in its self-understanding
entailed maintaining the cult of Stalin and then there was this brief period of alliance with China
and then eventually also broke with China when the Chinese became too moderate so basically when I
was growing up it was completely on its own and the understanding was that it was on its own
and the rhetoric was it was on its own and so this is how I grew up with this idea that
it was a small country that stood up to all these great superpowers for the sake of a freedom that
it defended and that we all as citizens of that state had a duty to defend as well.
And what I particularly liked about the book was the way in which you approach the task of opening
up our collective sense of political imagination because you do so in a I would say multi-directional
manner you do it by reflecting upon the past in order to learn from concrete experiences in
this case the experiences of communist Albania and its transition to liberal democracy and by
looking at these concrete experiences you at the same time open up a space of possibility for both
critical reflection about the present as well as the imagination of alternative futures I would say
would you say this is an accurate description of the book's movement?
Yeah I think the book is very much a book that is not prescriptive in any way and so to the extent
that it has anything prescriptive in terms of how it should be understood it really is about opening
up reflection spaces and then letting readers draw their own conclusions I'd say the overarching theme
of the book is freedom and what it means to be free and with that connected with that the theme
of autonomy and to kind of make decisions that you're responsible for even though you live in
circumstances and conditions in which you don't actually make all the world according to the way
which you'd wanted to make so you're kind of thrown into a world that you don't control
but somehow have to make these decisions that you do have to take ownership of and own the
consequences of and the book really does that by reflecting both at a personal level in terms of
it's a coming-of-age story and so it's about an individual who discovers what freedom may or may
not be and both the kind of the promises and the disillusionments of freedom and about a country
that goes through a similar process of seeing freedom sometimes promised and sometimes betrayed
and sometimes coming as a dream sometimes coming as a tragedy and all of these things I think
enable the book to operate at different levels as you say of criticism both of various theories
approaches and so abstract conceptions of you know how the world should be run and to try and
think about that in context and also more importantly in how they affect individuals and
how they make a difference to the lives of people but also then to reflect on the difficulties that
these raise at the individual level in terms of their own personal people's personal choices
and how they try to navigate these transitions and changes in the system and so on so I would
say that because it's a book on freedom and because it's not really an abstract book on
freedom even though there are many abstract themes that permeate all its chapters it's a book that
really tries to leave the reader as free as possible in interpreting it and thinking about
you know what does it mean where is it going what's the author trying to say and so on and so
obviously I have it has a political message I have my own political messages and so on but I
try not to say a lot more than the book already says about all these things and to just let people
draw their own conclusions from it so it's a very open book in that sense and more as I say more a
book of reflection and opening up spaces for reflection than on anything more concrete and
more directed and more specific even though the book itself doesn't prescribe any interpretation
and this is absolutely great I would be interested in your opinions anyway I guess and in the like
abstract ideas and your positioning towards them as well and there's one passage in the book where
you kind of dissect the new political language that is coming along with a system change and
there are different words that that are new to you as a child or as a teenager and to the public in
Albania in total I would say the words like civil society for example and there's a list that you
have of words that got swapped for others and I'd like to quote some of them because you say that
civil society joined other keywords such as liberalization which replaced democratic
centralism privatization which replaced collectivization transparency which replaced
self-criticism transition which stayed the same but now indicated the transition from socialism to
liberalism instead of the transition from socialism to communism and fighting corruption which replaced
anti-imperialist struggle end quote and then you state that all of these new terms that came up
with this system change were connected to a word that both political systems used heavily and that's
freedom as you already stated only now it was about the freedom of individual and not the
collective so maybe we could talk a bit about these different conceptions of freedom you
reflect upon in the book and how they are reflected within the different systems that you experienced
and then maybe which ideas of freedom are still unrealized and unreflected in both of these systems
yeah great so that's the in that is the big question of the book in a way it's it's the
book is a reflection of these ideas different ideas of freedom and how they're central to
these different systems and also in some ways in the book to central to also the life orientation
of the particular characters of the book and I guess the two main ones that try I try to talk
about as a political theorist is the ones that have in the intellectual tradition and
history of political thought being thought of as alternatives to each other so on the one hand
this idea of negative freedom and then the idea of positive freedom and I'll say a little bit more
about each of them if I may and then I'll say what I think about both of them and where that
what I think comes through in the book so there is this character in the book which is my mother
who is a kind of arch libertarian and who is a proto or not proto-post Thatcherite figure
or a contemporary of Thatcher at least she's sort of modeling herself on Thatcher in her hostility
to socialism in her belief in individual responsibility in her belief in unlimited
personal freedom which also entails the freedom to make mistakes and to let these uncoordinated
structures of cooperation between individuals fail when they need to in the way in which
sometimes it's described by Hayek or these kind of authors connected to that way of thinking and
with this great resistance to the concept of the state and of bureaucracy and of administration as
all abstract obstacles to the realization of this perfect individual freedom and that's in
her conception this freedom is close to what has often been called negative freedom because it's
the freedom from and so you are free to the extent that nobody tells you where to go what to do how
to dress and in that in those freedoms being absent is consists the lack of freedom of a society
and of course Albania in that sense or communist society of that kind and of the kind I grew up in
was a paradigmatic example of the violation of these freedoms because you couldn't think freely
you could you weren't allowed to express your opinions in writing you weren't allowed to protest
you would actually be harshly punished if you try to leave the country and so there is a number of
domains of personal life in which individuals could not be free and so my mother thought that
and this this conception of freedom that she stands for in some way this negative conception
of freedom is represented by this violation that Albanian communism exemplified in its most severe
most extreme form and is gained after in the transition after 1990 because it is exactly
what comes it's the ability to vote freely in elections to have uncontrolled uncensored
political opinions to also travel outside the country and so on and that's some of these things
are the kinds of things that I put pressure on this conception of freedom when I say that the
freedom from or for example the freedom from obstacles to traveling isn't that robust and
isn't that meaningful if you don't actually have options too and so this takes us to a different
slightly not antagonistic but complementary I would say account of freedom which is the one
that my father exemplifies in the book so he is this character who is some people define him as
a kind of classical lefty or social democrat but more kind of radical kind or someone with left
leanings who is very concerned by opportunities opportunities to flourish opportunities to be who
you are and to realize yourself and who realizes also that this negative conception of freedom is
not enough to guarantee that but you know freedom is also freedom too it's not just freedom from
it's not just a freedom from an agent interfering with your personal choices it's also freedom to
find opportunities in a social structure that is hospitable to your choices and to your autonomy
and he's interesting because he has this alternative conception of freedom
sometimes in the liberal literature in the kind of classical liberal literature so if
you think for example of Isaiah Berlin's account of freedom and his criticisms of negative or
positive freedom often the idea of positive freedom is represented as the idea of having
an authority that actually guarantees these conditions for freedom and so it's often presented
as what you want you either you can either have negative freedom or if you want positive freedom
the positive freedom leads you to a kind of totalitarian abuse because if it gives to a
collective responsibility for the realization of the individual that are somewhat dangerous
but in some ways you also see that that positive freedom is actually what is missing in post
communist Albania in the 90s is precisely this idea that you are formally free allegedly free
in fact you have negative freedom but what you don't have is often positive freedom in terms of
the environment in which you live the society in which you live making accommodations to your
ability to realize yourself and so there's two examples in the book one is the freedom of
movement one which I talk about this idea that you can be free to leave your country nobody shoots
you anymore at the border but then you're trying to get into the west and the borders are closed
and so where do you go does that mean that you really have freedom of movement or not if you
don't have the freedom to be somewhere as opposed to just the freedom from leaving somewhere and in
another dimension it comes out because my father despite him being a lefty and being very concerned
by this conception by this idea of a society that is accommodating for everyone and so on
is at one point in a position of responsibility and needs to make decisions for firing workers
as a result of the structural reforms that were brought about with the help of international
institutions like the world bank and the imf and so on and to implement what was called the
shock therapy that was a way in which people talked about how the societies of eastern
europe had to be brought up to being up to scratch with the standards of free market societies both
political and economic and this would entail shutting down state enterprises privatizing
wealth and increasing the ability of individuals to take free economic initiatives which brought
a huge cost which in some case also entailed a raise of unemployment for example and my father was
responsible for firing people on behalf of those who were supporting these structural reforms
which he found very difficult because to connect it to this conception of freedom
it's very hard to think that you have a positive freedom if you are not able to flourish in society
and you can't flourish if you don't have a job basically so this is the the second idea and so
there's a sense in which one might simplify it by saying you can have a society in which
you are guaranteed from unemployment but you don't have freedom of speech and another society is you
have freedom of speech but no guarantees from unemployment and these are deficient models of
freedom but from different reasons and on different conceptions of freedom so that's the the kind of
crude simplified picture of these two alternatives that I present and then there's still room for
something else isn't it you paint a picture of these alternatives and these are of course kind
of prototypes of conceptions of freedom but both of these alone miss something for sure and we
should develop some alternative which kind of brings in additional notions of what freedom
could actually be like so what is it that is still unresolved when you simply just
take these two examples as if this was the whole thing that is actually possible
yeah so the one that I describe in the book and that I'm interested in exploring is something
that comes through my grandmother's character and the idea that she basically for both from
my mother and from my father they lived in they live in unfree societies both of them are unfree
for different reasons but you know they fail to realize the promises that they make and what's
interesting about my grandmother is that she has someone who has lived through different transitions
different political systems different political communities she's born in this ottoman town
salonica shortly before it became shortly before the ottoman empire collapsed for good and so her
identity is one of a political unit unit that doesn't exist anymore and she and then she came
to albania and was the wife of was first integrated in the albanian elite and was relatively progressive
but then her husband went to prison and so she was deported and had ended up in working in labor
camps and had this very difficult life under communism and what always stood out about her
was the fact that whenever you asked her to you know to talk about her life she never stressed
the oppression she always is stressed stressed agency the fact that even in all these circumstances
she was able to find her direction and to take responsibility for the things that she had done
and she brought me up this kind of inculcating me with this idea that even in the most oppressive
circumstances there is something that no nobody can take away from you which is free which is
human dignity and in that human dignity consists freedom and so and this is why partly i became
later interested in exploring this idea but for me freedom is something that is revealed in moral
agency in your ability to make choices between the good and the bad and to resist compromises
that bring huge costs to other people and i would say that's a more critical conception of freedom
that's neither positive nor negative freedom but it's exactly as i call it when i talk about the
book and when i talk about my favorite conception of freedom is freedom as moral agency and that
means that this freedom of moral agency which is revealed in the agent's capacity to see that they
have this inner freedom but they live in a world that doesn't realize these moral relations that
doesn't in a world that doesn't dignify people where you have this internal dignity but the
dignity is not recognized in the social relations between people that's a more abstract way of
talking about unfreedom than to just say it's not having the freedom to work or it's not having the
freedom to talk or whatever it's basically about what kind of social relations what kind of
political world you want to live in and is it possible for that world to realize this morality
this kind of core morality that we find in the individual and that is never actually taken away
from and so this is slightly different because in one way you're free always because you're
always a moral agent and you always have the capacity to discern the good from the bad but in
another way you're also not free when you don't live in a world in which that is instantiated
at the level of social relations and so this conception of freedom as moral agency i think
gives you a kind of critical benchmark from which you can observe and assess the circumstances of
the societies in which you live and you can also make decisions about how critical to be of those
societies and how to examine the politics of those societies and to see whether they're actually
realizing freedom or not very interesting i mean this moral agency this can hardly be
independent of the socio-political structures that forms them that kind of set the scene for
the individual to act within so how do you define this relation between the
the like superstructure so to speak and the individual that should rely on this kind of
moral agency because i mean this is highly entangled isn't it yeah so i think the the
moral agency is what enables you to be critical of the structures in which you live and so it's
what enables you to ask yourself the question of do i live in a political environment or in an
economic environment or in a social environment in which dignity is realized and to me that entails
a range of criticisms about the absence of those freedoms in a lot of domains that we are surrounded
by and so and as an ideal of a kind of society that you want to live in i think it takes you
to a fully egalitarian democratic society in which democracy is central to realizing freedom
in moral relations amongst all people and the reason that takes you to a critique of both the
economic and the political order and social order in which we live is that we live in an order in
which that is actually shaped by asymmetries of power of all kinds and that can be economic
power it can be social power it can be political power it can be about the power of bigger states
towards smaller states in the international sphere it can be about the power of employers
that have money versus vulnerable citizens that don't have money in the labor market it can be
about social relations and hierarchies of race or language or identity that kind of permeate these
historical self-understandings of people and so i think none of it is defined but what it what
what you get from this conception is a way of criticizing what the environment in which you
live in and that can give you the kind of critical standard with which to then try and
move forward from the critique and and then to kind of collaborate with others as well and to
work with others to to try and construct something that is better that's very interesting because
this is again highly tied to the biographical the image that you paint of yourself as a child and
maybe early teenager within the book because there's this moment where you realize that
all of the structures that had given you some kind of standing within the world some kind of
help in terms of sense making and and all of this kind of collapsed at some point where you realized
that this so to speak moral agency that you that you talk about had actually been kind of absent
because you had been living within structures that were not kind of producing this moral agency
within the individuals and so you have this moment of realization that that all of this
actually was not given within your life up until this point i'd say no um yeah although i think
so this the thing is there is a difference between the perspective of a child and the
perspective of a grown-up and that's why the coming-of-age aspect of the book is really
important because in some ways it's about it's a book about reaching maturity and the ways in
which we come to discover the truth and in my case and also about the importance of education
and of people around you in bringing you to see these truths or to kind of not so much to see
the truth but to see ways of thinking about the truth and accessing it and in many ways it's a
story about the dangers of ideology and the the risks that every society that we live in every
system that we are under comes packaged with ideas or dominant discourses about how we should
understand that society how we should understand the system and they become part of the ordinary
language and part of the vocabulary with which we refer to that system and make it very hard for us
in some ways to kind of stand out but on the other hand it's also a story about resilience and the
fact that these critical capacities are always there as they are in my grandmother and often
being a mature person or being a moral agent is about realizing that these capacities are there
they may be more or less dormant and they may be depending on circumstances more possible or less
possible to be activated but i think it's really important that they are there because that is
the only thing that enables people to rise above ideology to rise about the given scripts to rise
above the fact that you get told slogans and that you internalize these slogans about the
world in which you live and you're never able to fully see beyond those slogans unless you discover
this kind of critical capacity that is in everyone interesting i'm still kind of trying to
to get an idea of whether or not this kind of entails some form of essentialism where there
is this like sensor that kind of makes you realize whether something is wrong or right it sounds a
bit like that there's a part in your book where you kind of reflect upon yourself and ask yourself
whether or not you might have become someone who would have never come to a position where
you would have had these moral agencies and so this at least within the book it sounds as if
you considered that this might have been a possibility so this would lead us to a place
where there is not an kind of sensor built within each and every individual that at the end will
reveal this kind of critical capacity but that there is indeed the possibility of like full
ideology so to speak where this this idea of critical reflection is so much like out of out
of the realm of possibility that it is not even considered yeah so this is not in the book it's
i mean this is not a question that i raise as a as a question as a philosophical question in the
book but i can tell you what i think about it so i think there is a kind of essentialism which is
an essentialism about reason and it's not an essentialism about you know a thing but it's an
essentialism about a capacity that only humans have to the extent that they have reason and so
the assumption that i make in my other work not in this work is that not in this book
is that to the extent that people have reason they have this capacity and this moral capacity
is the thing that is you know something that you can't alienate if you have reason then you're
able to see this and you may be able to hear it more strongly or less strongly so you may be a
victim again it's a question of nuance and different people will be exposed to these
influences in different ways so you have to allow for the possibility as i do in my book that i
might have become someone who was a state bureaucrat or or someone who in the end absorbs
a family narrative and turns against the state and becomes a dissident and so i don't deny that
personal histories and biographies condition how we think about freedom the extent to which
we are free but i also don't want to fully allow for that so i think it's somewhere and this is
why the book is ambiguous and this is why perhaps the the narrative voice of the book is one of
ambiguity because this and this is why it's a really a story that works with kind of showing
rather than trying to convince people that this is how it is you can just tell different stories
of different people and you can present them with different accounts and ways of understanding
themselves to make these arguments because they're not really it's not an either or i think and so
yeah fundamentally i am convinced that we all can see this that even a murderer or even a kind of
criminal or even someone who is purely or pure racist or whatever has something in them that
will at some point make them see that this is the right the wrong way to think about the world and
that you know that the way they are operating what they think is right is actually just their might
in a way and i'm kind of wedded to that world you it's a very and this but this is a very old
and long and in some ways unreconcilable debate which i think is to some extent really you only
reconcile it by somehow making a leap of faith in a way in humanity and in morality and and the
fact that reason entails this you can't completely resolve it but if you don't resolve it then you're
left with very little if you don't resolve it with this leap of faith then that is the basis for
every argument this is the base for democracy it's the basis for argumentation it's the basis
on which we try to convince each other and the basis on which we try to overcome our
particularity to try and have these conversations with each other and so if that's not there
all of these things become really difficult because we can never leave the position
from which we speak we can never leave our stories behind we can never leave our personal
histories we can never leave the conditioning behind and so i think it's just it's there's a
sense in which you ask yourself okay what can you do with these two conceptions and you discover
that with the one you can it's a starting point for something for a process and with the other
it doesn't really take you anywhere all right and we want to get to places so let's go along with
this one with this route and ask which kind of political economies might be best suited
to bring about this idea of freedoms in plural maybe and you briefly mentioned shock therapy
i did an episode with isabella m veba on her really great book how china escaped shock therapy
and unfortunately albania did not escape shock therapy if i'm not mistaken and there's a strand
of future histories that is dedicated to the question of democratic plant economies now you
have experienced uh hierarchical non-democratic central uh economies plant economies as well as
so-called liberal market economies so i would be very much interested in your opinion on the
question of democratic plant economies and their possibility my vote would go out for some type of
libertarian socialist plant economy i'd say which might be called in german freie planwirtschaft
this is a attack i really enjoy actually is this something you would consider given both your
experiences with different systems as well as your intellectual reflection yeah so i mean i can
i can speak to this but i'm not an expert on it so i'm not going to say anything that is
particularly authoritative or informed or you know that has thought through where my where my
critiques take me is basically to a point of radical rejection of capitalism i suppose and
of the monopolies of economic power and of the lack of control that the free market brings for
individuals and of the fact that there is a kind of doctrine of the free market which just happens
to be precisely the shock therapy doctrine the idea that you know unintended consequences produce
good things for from the vices of everyone there will be virtues and the to the extent that there
are costs these need to be borne by the individuals because it's just a matter of personal
responsibility and so there is a sense in which there is a faith in these anonymous forces of the
free market that i'm not particularly keen on because i think that's a loss of control and if
you care about freedom and agency that's one way in which you don't have that agency having said
that i think there are possible alternatives and there's many models but i'm also usually very
reluctant to say which of the models is the right one because i think it should be a matter of
democratic scrutiny and debate so what you can do is you can put you can say i think this is a model
that really doesn't work and so you know there's some things in the world that are just plain wrong
that are actually the dominant ones in the world in which we live you know there's concentrations
of wealth and power by both individuals and states that on this account of freedom are very easy to
point out that they're flawed and that should be rejected but then once you've done this work of
rejection you are left with a lot of possibilities and i don't think maybe i'm wrong on this but i
don't think i have any particular stake or any particular insight or any particular knowledge or
better knowledge than other people to say this is the way to go this is the right model because
my take is that a lot of these things should be subject to democratic scrutiny and that you
should create spaces for democratic interaction in which these different projects can emerge and be
confronted with each other and it's only when you have this exchange that you're actually really
able to see how they go and whether you can assess them fully it's only when they're articulated in
the public sphere and when they're articulated with the help of lots of different people not
just philosophers and not just economists and not just politicians but it's a kind of there's a
sense in which all of us contribute with our skills so articulating these views but there is
a political process through which these views need to be articulated and exchanged with each other
and then whatever emerges from this process is something that i would cherish and hold on to but
i don't want to say you know i think this is a way to go either you know because i think that's
one of the problems in some ways of both actually the tradition of democratic of central planning
and the tradition that that succeed that came after you know this idea of kind of making policy
without politics is precisely that people were so invested in coming up with the right policies
that they forget that every policy should be a matter for democratic debate and and that's what
i'm really keen on now it may be because i'm not an expert so i'm political theorist and so i care
about democracy and i think it's really important to get around this relationship between elites
or experts and the public in the right way and to articulate that relationship in the right way and
democracy helps us do that and so yeah i don't think i have a lot more in terms of the specifics
of the projects huh that's interesting because i mean i totally get it there it's absolutely
important to kind of point out the the critique and you have developed a an idea of freedom that
allows you to point towards different forms of of dysfunction where this freedom is actually not
being produced within the present but still this must at some point have led you to at least
wondering about how the kinds of freedoms that you would like to see being produced how they
could be brought about in which kind of like political economy they could be brought about
and i would say i totally understand it's not about like prescribing some kind of one best way
i absolutely share that but this doesn't mean that we should not engage in the question of
how could alternatives actually look like because if we do not do that then we kind of stand there
with empty hands if people are rightfully frustrated with the status quo actually and
we need to have i would say we need to have some kinds of ideas of how alternatives could
look like and it should be a plurality of ideas of course and they should be debated but there
should be ideas i mean i would say yeah yeah no no so i'm not saying i'm not saying there
shouldn't be ideas i'm just saying that i'm not the right person to articulate this political
economy proposal i see that's all i'm saying i'm saying there is a i'm saying there's a division
of labor in society whereby all of us do certain things and are better because of the knowledge
and the stories and whatever background they have at articulating different things and bringing them
in the public sphere and i'm just not someone who is able to speak competently on the question of
exactly you know what political economy do we need i'm saying that my take at a generic level
takes me to a criticism of capitalism as the system in which we live and so i think that what
we should be looking at is an economy beyond capitalism now you know where exactly how exactly
that works at at each level local national global at some level is a question of democratic debate
and so i i think i would still subscribe to that but at another level is you know in that democratic
debate what do what does each of us contribute and i don't contribute alternative policies
because that's not what i do and i don't know enough about that i see i see okay i know i get
it and but what you do actually contribute is a very concrete investigation of your own experience
and at some point at the end of the book where you have an epilogue you point towards a discussion
group a marxist discussion group with some of your friends i think in italy or maybe great britain
and you state that my friends is my friends socialism was clear bright and in the future
mine was messy bloody and of the past end quote and i think what you also try or at least it
seemed to me as if what you try there is pointing us towards maybe what you just said i'm not the
one to paint a picture of a concrete alternative political economy but what i can bring to the
table is looking back at these concrete experiences and there's something to be learned from those
so what is it that you want to show your friends from the study group and us as readers when
looking at these stories these people these experiences what what do they bring forth
yeah i think in a way exactly what you said so this sensitivity to history and to historical
circumstances i mean for me that sentence about you know their socialism was in the future and
mine was in the past really is a sentence about biography because here there are you know these
western former liberals who have turned radicals who only think about you know how what this future
is going to be and how future society will be and in thinking about that dismiss the history
of real world socialism as though it wasn't relevant to these kinds of thinking about the
future to these kinds of projects where to me one of the most important questions to ask is
why do societies that subscribe to these principles why did they fail historically what did they do
wrong and one of them is to do about the absence of democracy this is why i kind of care so much
about democracy and the fact that it's not you know you don't it's not about having the right
policy having the right principle having the right vision it's actually about having the right
environment for enabling conversations to be had that often take a confrontational form that
where you actually have this robust possibility of speaking between different alternatives and
where you radicalize democracy rather than suppressing it as these societies historically
did who better who worse you know who more who less and so there's again there's nuances there
and to me to treat to put all of these societies in one big bag as I say in the book you know to
say oh these are failed socialisms like China, Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, Vietnam, Albania when
they're so different and when they have all these internal debates with each other is to be completely
ignorant of the past but in a way that is also hampering for your own thinking of the future
because there's a wealth of knowledge there and resources that you need to engage with in order
to be able to reflect on possibilities for changing societies again compatibly with these
ideals and so I think that's the that's the simple story in a way so there I'm encountering this
group of people who only thinks about the future and comes from a very different experience and
on the other hand my socialism when I came out of Albania and that's my that's why that sentence is
there really is just associated to the past and lacks a future and so it's the exact opposite it's
I come from a place in which people think well socialism is done and dusted and there is no way
to think about it for the future and I'm someone who wants to still be able to contemplate the
ideas because she thinks that there is something in the critique of capitalism because she thinks
there's something in the kind of account of democracy that is there in the in the thought
processes and in the intellectual tradition that is important to recover
and so you have on the one hand the people with a wealth of knowledge about the past but no
beliefs in the future and here you have another people who has a lot of stuff to say about the
future but doesn't want to engage with the past and there's something missing in these
interactions that I think there's a kind of gap that needs to be bridged and can only be bridged
with I think an open mind to how history works and to the fact that you never as I say in the
beginning of the book you never make history out of your own free will but you make it
nevertheless and it's important to engage with both of these thoughts and to and to hold tensions
Brilliant and I guess what you do with the book is exactly that you you kind of mediate between
these words between the the the also contemporary Albania and the non-futures that they like
experience somewhat what is the experience in doing that because I saw that you you went on
tv shows in Albania so you interacted with the Albanian public on this topic so how did the
they receive this book how do they receive this this whole notion of trying to get to different
points of reflecting on on the history of Albania and trying to gain something out of it
I would say that it's divided the the opinion is divided but sometimes it's divided by politics
in the way in which it would be here as well if you were to try and say you know I think socialism
still has a future it's probably quite likely that you'll meet a lot of people who will say no
socialism only has a past and this is the past and in Albania obviously that's much more life
because of the actual past and the kind of past that it is so it's also somewhat understandable
the other part of the the critical reception of the book is that obviously the book does a
lot with the history of Albania and does a lot with Albania as such but I also say that when
here as I'm doing here it's also a book about ideas and kind of it's a philosophical book in
many ways and there is a worry that if you come from a small country and you've written a book
that a lot of people read outside that small country and that is successful by some criterion
there is a worry that that book becomes the story of that country which is understandable and so I
think there is a bit of reaction and resentment with that because it's it's only my story it's
not everyone's story and it's also my ideas it's not everyone's ideas and so there is a
word that if this is a book about Albania that explains Albanian transition to the western world
there is a burden of responsibility on one book and one author which an author in a book from a
dominant hegemonic country doesn't usually have but that's completely understandable that people
are frustrated and sometimes resentful because you know they think there's another way of talking
about this past which is not mine and I share that and I understand that so I think but that
speaks to the in some ways to the to the problems with the way in which the book market works and
the way with circulation of knowledge works and dominant cultures operate and how they engage with
smaller cultures which I think as I say it's a kind of legitimate word but not one that you
can really bear the burden of as an author whereas when it comes to the politics I think
I mean it's hard to say because this is another question that often comes up as people say to me
are you comparing kind of socialism with liberalism and in a way the thing is that liberal period is
still going on in Albania so it's really hard to compare something that's complete with something
that's not complete right and and so people often read the book as a book of comparison when it's
actually not it's a book about freedom and how ideas of freedom emerge in different circumstances
and by different characters but I think it's in some ways revealing of the mindset of the country
which is about you know there's these two alternatives and one is the past and one is
the future and the one is about the future is something that we still need to hold on to
otherwise what do we get we still get the past and so it's really hard to get out of this binary
logic which is what you know the country has been stuck in for the last 30 years which was there
when it's emerged because there was this idea of the end of history and you know if it's not that
and so in some ways I think ideologically at least this notion that there is no alternative
is still there and it's still very powerful and perhaps not just in Albania but also in other
countries yes indeed it is and I mean at the end you you saw a system change in real life so you
experienced the system change though so that makes it kind of a little bit easier to see that of
course things could be different you know and I mean there are many people in within
western countries for sure that still very much stick to this idea of capitalist realism
that it's easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism so
you have seen different systems of political economy so you you know for sure it's not true
so that's kind of a positive I would say in your in your last answer you briefly said
that you do believe that socialism has a future so do you because you were kind of reluctant
when it comes to describing alternative political economies like concrete alternatives but you would
say that there is something to to gain when looking at specifically socialism and the communist
traditions and the theoretical work and stuff like that yeah yeah sure yeah I mean that's
something that I subscribe to it's not that like I call myself a socialist and I have a socialist
and just as just as I'm an anti-capitalist no I was more talking about you know specific aspects
of prescriptions and you know what concrete proposals you could make about how exactly to
run I don't know a democratic enterprise and how to engage with the market forces when you're
running a democratic enterprise these are the kinds of more detailed things that or you know
how to create what would it look like exactly for the European Union to turn into a federal
socialist entity which I think what is what it should turn into but I think of it as that more
as a kind of democratic project that needs to be out there not I don't have a specific fully
worked out conception of how exactly it needs to be reformed along those lines but I do think that
it needs to be reformed along those lines so yeah that's not that's not that's not where my
skepticism is coming from I see so so do you think we need some some kind of new meta narratives
that are able to to carry this like pluralism of freedoms this pluralism of different ideas that
will need to be kind of democratically thought out and thought out but do you do you think that
that we need some some kind of carrier in terms of new meta narratives
I mean I wonder what the new meta narrative would be for me it's actually very simple I think we
need to be united in our rejection of the status quo as a system I think it's there is a lot
packed in that but basically people need to for me as I see it maybe I'm wrong and maybe this is
another thing that needs to be tested democratically but my conviction is that the sooner we give up
on the possibility of reforming capitalism the better off we will be in terms of thinking about
alternatives and so where you start off is by saying I want my critique of the system in which
I live to be really radical and I want to aspire to a new foundation of a new system at a legal
level at a political level at an economic level at a local level at a global level so it's basically
a kind of alternative global outlook basically and of course this is not something that a single
person can do you know and I don't think it was ever something that a single person could do so
I think it's foolish to think okay but you have a theory or do you have a what hey how is it exactly
how is it going to work exactly because that's you know the work of a collective but that this
is the starting point to me seems very elementary and in fact you wake up every day and you look at
the world and it seems pretty obvious that that's exactly what needs to happen but maybe just you
know Brecht used to say the simplicity difficult to make and that's the kind of thing that we're
up against in a way that is so intuitive that there should be an alternative system of social
relations and one that is in a way makes good on this promise of moral world and these promises
of freedom that are in all our constitutions in all our legal documents in all our political
rhetoric and the discourses and then and yet fail miserably everywhere around us and I think
if you just point out and in some ways the role of the book was that to point out this gap between
the ideals that we all subscribe to and the realities that we're all surrounded by and the
sooner we realize that there's a reason why the reality doesn't match the ideals is because we're
in the wrong system the better off we will be and the experience of engaging with in some ways kind
of going back to these debates around 1990 and so on is that it seems to me 1990 for all its failures
and for all this the way it went wrong there was this possibility this moment this opening
where people actually thought okay now we could build better and we could do there was a sort of
an opening of the imagination at least in Eastern Europe maybe in the West it was never like that
maybe the West always thought you know they had won and that was it but I think in Eastern Europe
there was genuinely a moment of hope and thinking that now things would be different and people
finally had agency just before they were then flooded with you know the shock therapy and the
liberal markets and so on and it's that spirit of dissidents of the 90s coupled with the hope
that the system can change for the better as opposed to for some other kind of bad
that my book tries to recover and that I always try to convey.
And just to maybe for the books or for the record I sense some kind of misunderstanding here my
question is not so much oriented towards that the idea that I think that you have the answers or
one answer anything as such I'm perfectly aware of that it's not one person that will have this
answer but I'm still very much interested in kind of what are the agents in very much in plural the
communities the movements the collectives and the metanarratives that that will together form
some kind of carrier that will then move forward from the point of recognizing that the status quo
is perfectly fucked up and you need to change it. Right right so I think I mean there's two stories
there it's either those who experience it or those who reflect on it right so there are some
who will experience the failings and the oppression on their skin right they will have it it will be
part of their day-to-day lives that the way in which the system misdelivers for them or the way
in which system betrays them or the way in which it doesn't realize their freedoms so there will
be a sense in which the agents are the victims of the system but there's another part in which
I think it's also important that other you know Kant would have called them impartial spectators
there's a lot of people out there who may not necessarily be victims but who may reflect on the
plight of those who are victims and who are engaging with the kinds of injustice and the
kinds of oppressions that there are and they are also agents and so there is this you know debate
amongst marxists on class consciousness and whether you know it's something in itself or for itself
whether something you can develop or something you need to be born with and I think I'm very open
on that debate I don't think that you have to be a victim of oppression yourself to be able to have
an interest in emancipation along those lines you can also just engage with it and see and there's
different points from which you can engage with it but yeah so I think the agents can be constructed
by reflecting and by diagnosing the wrongs of the world and by looking at the gaps and the cracks in
the system and the failures and you know different in this plural sites of struggle you know there
will be workers there will be environmental crises there will be financial credit all the
different crises that we encounter will each of them produce the agents that are necessary to go
beyond the status quo and to try and think about the future in the right way and then
there's a last question that I ask all of my guests which is if you think about the future
what makes you joyful yeah and there is an answer I always give when I get answered that question
which is that I am a Kantian and I have a duty to hope and so I don't have to there doesn't have
to be anything but in the world makes me hopeful because I think hope is a duty and to the extent
that you have reason and to the extent that you're engaging and you're in the world and you're
trying to do things then there is no alternative to being hopeful you can't carry on if you're
not hopeful and so you know the question of is there anything in the world that makes me
hopeful or not it's I don't know it doesn't matter it's not it's not important to me that
can be nothing it could be a desert it could be horrible and I would still be hopeful
Leah thank you so much for your time and being part of future histories thank you for having me
that was our show for today thanks a lot for listening if you want to support future histories
you can do so on patreon for this visit patreon.com slash future histories or you can simply tell a
friend that you liked the show and that he she or they might like it as well
thanks a lot and hear you in two weeks